Blog the move to Libera.chat (#4425)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/blog/2021/06/2021-06-17-libera-chat.adoc

---
:layout: post

> :title: "Jenkins IRC on Libera Chat"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:title: "Jenkins IRC mover to Libera Chat"
```

:tags:

> - community

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- community
- announcement
- chat
```

:author: markewaite

> opengraph:

Reviewer: Maybe you want to pre-register a Discourse conversation so that it is present once #4424 is integrated

Author: Attempted in ee97a9e316881f2bd09b3631f2876f752362655f

>   image: /images/post-images/2021-06-libera-chat/jenkins-irc-on-libera-chat-opengraph.png

Reviewer: Arrow could be moved to not overlap with text

Author: Fixed in a8188edb8cac2fd1d283e7ba8536adedbe1ee7e3 .  Thanks!

---

image:/images/post-images/2021-06-libera-chat/jenkins-irc-on-libera-chat-opengraph.png[Jenkins IRC now on Libera Chat, role=center, link="https://groups.google.com/g/jenkinsci-dev/c/pEcun5ZSfgo/m/ztRg03VNAgAJ"]

> The link:/chat/#internet-relay-chat-irc[Jenkins IRC chat channels] have moved to Libera chat.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The link:/chat/#internet-relay-chat-irc[Jenkins IRC channels] have moved to Libera chat.
```

Many Jenkins developers have been dropped without warning from the previous Jenkins IRC chat system on Freenode.

> Rather than remain in a system that was increasingly unfriendly to our developers and administrators, the Jenkins project has moved to link:https://libera.chat/[Libera Chat IRC].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rather than remain in a system that was increasingly unfriendly to our developers and administrators, the Jenkins community has moved to link:https://libera.chat/[Libera Chat IRC].
```

> 

Reviewer: * List channels we support on Libera chat?
* List channel we abandoned (e.g. `#jenkins-meeting`) and reference the replacement channels?

A more detailed history of the transition is available on the link:https://groups.google.com/g/jenkinsci-dev/c/pEcun5ZSfgo/m/ztRg03VNAgAJ[Jenkins developers mailing list].
Special thanks to Tim Jacomb, Gavin Mogan, Alex Earl, and Olivier Vernin for their work on the migration of IRC channels and automation.

> Other Jenkins chat systems like link:/chat/#gitter[Gitter] and link:/chat/#slack[Slack] are unchanged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other Jenkins chat channels like link:/chat/#gitter[Gitter] and link:/chat/#slack[Slack] are unchanged.
We intend replacing many of those channels by link:https://community.jenkins.io/[community.jenkins.io] -
a new portal powered by link:https://www.discourse.org/[Discourse].
This portal is currently in preview, stay tuned for announcements!
```

Good time to pithc and pre-announce Discourse? CC @halkeye @olblak

---
:layout: post

> :title: "Jenkins IRC moved to Libera Chat"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:title: "Jenkins IRC moves to Libera Chat"
```

:tags:
- community
- announcement
- chat

> :author: markewaite

Reviewer: ```suggestion
authors:
- markewaite
- oleg_nenashev
```

Feel free to reject

links:
  discourse: https://community.jenkins.io/t/jenkins-irc-moved-to-libera-chat/146
opengraph:
  image: /images/post-images/2021-06-libera-chat/jenkins-irc-on-libera-chat-opengraph.png
---

> image:/images/post-images/2021-06-libera-chat/jenkins-irc-on-libera-chat-opengraph.png[Jenkins IRC now on Libera Chat, role=center, link="https://groups.google.com/g/jenkinsci-dev/c/pEcun5ZSfgo/m/ztRg03VNAgAJ"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
image:/images/post-images/2021-06-libera-chat/jenkins-irc-on-libera-chat-opengraph.png[Jenkins IRC now on Libera Chat, role=center, link="/chat/#internet-relay-chat-irc"]
```

> The link:/chat/#internet-relay-chat-irc[Jenkins IRC channels] have moved to Libera chat.
> Many Jenkins developers have been dropped without warning from the previous Jenkins IRC chat system on Freenode.
> Rather than remain in a system that was increasingly unfriendly to our developers and administrators, the Jenkins community has moved to link:https://libera.chat/[Libera Chat IRC].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are happy to announce that
the Jenkins community has moved all its link:/chat/#internet-relay-chat-irc[official IRC channels] to link:https://libera.chat/[Libera chat].
We have started our migration on May 26 as a response to the 
link:https://www.theregister.com/2021/05/26/freenode_irc_takeover/[hostile takeover]
of hundreds of open source community channel by the new Freenode management.
As decided  by the Jenkins governance meeting on June 16th, 
Libera Chat IRC channels are the only official channels going forward.
```

> A more detailed history of the transition is available on the link:https://groups.google.com/g/jenkinsci-dev/c/pEcun5ZSfgo/m/ztRg03VNAgAJ[Jenkins developers mailing list].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A more detailed history of the transition is available on the link:https://groups.google.com/g/jenkinsci-dev/c/pEcun5ZSfgo/m/ztRg03VNAgAJ[Jenkins developers mailing list].

=== What did we move?

We have created the following IRC chats:

that currently live on freenode to libera.chat:

* `#jenkins` - general discussion channel for Jenkins users and developers.
  We do not longer consider it a central chat for all things Jenkins, but we intend to keep it available to users
  who want to keep using IRC.
* `#jenkins-hosting` - Chat used by the link:/project/teams/hosting/[Hosting Team] to manage hosting automation
* `#jenkins-infra` - Chat used by the link:/projects/infrastructure/#team[Infrastructure Team] to coordinate efforts related to Jenkins project infrastructure and the incident response
* `#jenkins-release`- Chat used for Jenkins core release coordination by the link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jenkins/blob/master/docs/MAINTAINERS.adoc#team[Release Team]

All other channels have NOT been moved to Libera Chat IRC and were replaced by other channels.
Most notable channels:

* `#jenkins-meeting` - the link:/project/governance-meeting/[Jenkins Governance Meeting] uses combination of Zoom and Google Docs at the moment. We do not longer use the IRC chat for that purpose.
* `#jenkins-cert` - no private chat going forward. The link:/security[Security Team] will use mailing lists only going forward
* `#jenkins-community` - Replaced by the link:https://gitter.im/jenkinsci/advocacy-and-outreach-sig[Advocacy&Outreach] Gitter channel.

=== Freenode concerns and disclaimers

Going forward, the Jenkins community does not have **ANY** official channels on Freenode.
All channels are either removed or left abandoned.
We do not longer manage or control our channels.
Most of the Jenkins IRC channel operators use IRCCloud,
and hence they link:https://twitter.com/oleg_nenashev/status/1403265278566412288[were banned] by the Freenode team on June 11th.
Only a few operators have reconnected since this event.

Taking the takeover of Freenode and hostile actions taken by the new management,
we can no longer guarantee any of the following:

* Authenticity of registered users on Freenode.
  All IRC accounts, cloaked or not, might have been taken over by the new Freenode management.
   Do not trust messages from the Jenkins contributor account IDs there.
* Confidentiality of private channels like `#jenkins-cert`.
  We performed audit of the conversations there, and we believe there are no undisclosed security vulnerabilities referenced in the channel.
   After all, this IRC has been rather dormant for the last 18 months.
 * IRC User Passwords.
   All passwords on Freenode IRC may be compromised in the future.
   We strongly advice all users to rotate their passwords if they were used on Freenode IRC.
   
 In the coming weeks we will publish backups of IRC channel conversations somewhere in our GitHub repositories.
 If you need any conversations right now, please reach out to the Jenkins Infrastructure team.
```

> Special thanks to Tim Jacomb, Gavin Mogan, Alex Earl, and Olivier Vernin for their work on the migration of IRC channels and automation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

=== Acknowledgements

We thank the entire link:https://libera.chat/[Libera Chat] team and all contributors who have worked on creating 
a Freenode replacement for hundreds of open source communities using IRC.
Within just a month, a new platform has been created and adopted by almost all active projects.
We remember the Hudson to Jenkins renaming days when a similar mobilization happened in the Jenkins community,
and we appreciate all the effort put by contributors.

Special thanks to Tim Jacomb, Gavin Mogan, Alex Earl, and Olivier Vernin for their work on the migration of IRC channels
and our automation like the link:projects/infrastructure/ircbot/[IRC Bot] used by the Jenkins hosting team.
```

> Other Jenkins chat channels like link:/chat/#gitter[Gitter] and link:/chat/#slack[Slack] are unchanged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== What's next?

In the Jenkins community we will keep using Libera Chat IRC and maintaining user and contributor channels there.
Other Jenkins chat channels like link:/chat/#gitter[Gitter] and link:/chat/#slack[Slack] are unchanged.
```

> We intend to replace many of those channels with link:https://community.jenkins.io/[community.jenkins.io].

Reviewer 2: Soon? Over the long term? Do we have an expected time frame for this?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We intend to gradually replace many of those channels with link:https://community.jenkins.io/[community.jenkins.io].
```

Works for you @daniel-beck ?

a new portal powered by link:https://www.discourse.org/[Discourse].

> This portal is currently in preview, stay tuned for announcements!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This portal is currently in preview, stay tuned for announcements.
As always, we will appreciate any suggestions and feedback!
```

---
:layout: post
:title: "Jenkins IRC moves to Libera Chat"
:tags:
- community
- announcement
- chat
authors:
- markewaite
- oleg_nenashev
links:
  discourse: https://community.jenkins.io/t/jenkins-irc-moved-to-libera-chat/146

> opengraph:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: >
  In this article we announce migration of the Jenkins community from Freenode IRC to Libera Chat.
  See the blogpost for the migration details and next steps for our community.
opengraph:
```

  image: /images/post-images/2021-06-libera-chat/jenkins-irc-on-libera-chat-opengraph.png
---

image:/images/post-images/2021-06-libera-chat/jenkins-irc-on-libera-chat-opengraph.png[Jenkins IRC now on Libera Chat, role=center, link="/chat/#internet-relay-chat-irc"]

We are happy to announce that
the Jenkins community has moved all its link:/chat/#internet-relay-chat-irc[official IRC channels] to link:https://libera.chat/[Libera chat].
We have started our migration on May 26 as a response to the 
link:https://www.theregister.com/2021/05/26/freenode_irc_takeover/[hostile takeover]
of hundreds of open source community channel by the new Freenode management.
As decided  by the Jenkins governance meeting on June 16th, 
Libera Chat IRC channels are the only official channels going forward.

A more detailed history of the transition is available on the link:https://groups.google.com/g/jenkinsci-dev/c/pEcun5ZSfgo/m/ztRg03VNAgAJ[Jenkins developers mailing list].

=== What did we move?

We have created the following IRC chats:

that currently live on freenode to libera.chat:

* `#jenkins` - general discussion channel for Jenkins users and developers.

>   We do not longer consider it a central chat for all things Jenkins, but we intend to keep it available to users

Author: ```suggestion
  We no longer consider it a central chat for all things Jenkins, but we intend to keep it available to users
```

* `#jenkins-infra` - Chat used by the link:/projects/infrastructure/#team[Infrastructure Team] to coordinate efforts related to Jenkins project infrastructure and the incident response
* `#jenkins-release`- Chat used for Jenkins core release coordination by the link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jenkins/blob/master/docs/MAINTAINERS.adoc#team[Release Team]

All other channels have NOT been moved to Libera Chat IRC and were replaced by other channels.
Most notable channels:

* `#jenkins-meeting` - the link:/project/governance-meeting/[Jenkins Governance Meeting] uses combination of Zoom and Google Docs at the moment. We do not longer use the IRC chat for that purpose.
* `#jenkins-cert` - no private chat going forward. The link:/security[Security Team] will use mailing lists only going forward
* `#jenkins-community` - Replaced by the link:https://gitter.im/jenkinsci/advocacy-and-outreach-sig[Advocacy&Outreach] Gitter channel.

=== Freenode concerns and disclaimers

Going forward, the Jenkins community does not have **ANY** official channels on Freenode.
All channels are either removed or left abandoned.

> We do not longer manage or control our channels.

Author: ```suggestion
We no longer manage or control our channels.
```

 If you need any conversations right now, please reach out to the Jenkins Infrastructure team.

=== Acknowledgements

We thank the entire link:https://libera.chat/[Libera Chat] team and all contributors who have worked on creating 
a Freenode replacement for hundreds of open source communities using IRC.
Within just a month, a new platform has been created and adopted by almost all active projects.
We remember the Hudson to Jenkins renaming days when a similar mobilization happened in the Jenkins community,
and we appreciate all the effort put by contributors.

Special thanks to Tim Jacomb, Gavin Mogan, Alex Earl, and Olivier Vernin for their work on the migration of IRC channels
and our automation like the link:projects/infrastructure/ircbot/[IRC Bot] used by the Jenkins hosting team.

=== What's next?

In the Jenkins community we will keep using Libera Chat IRC and maintaining user and contributor channels there.
Other Jenkins chat channels like link:/chat/#gitter[Gitter] and link:/chat/#slack[Slack] are unchanged.
We intend to replace many of those channels with link:https://community.jenkins.io/[community.jenkins.io].

> a new portal powered by link:https://www.discourse.org/[Discourse].
> This portal is currently in preview, stay tuned for announcements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a new portal powered by link:https://www.discourse.org/[Discourse].
The service is sponsored by link:https://www.discourse.org/[Civilized Discourse Construction Kit, Inc.].
It is currently in preview, stay tuned for announcements.
```

opengraph:
  image: /images/post-images/2021-06-libera-chat/jenkins-irc-on-libera-chat-opengraph.png
---

image:/images/post-images/2021-06-libera-chat/jenkins-irc-on-libera-chat-opengraph.png[Jenkins IRC now on Libera Chat, role=center, link="/chat/#internet-relay-chat-irc"]

We are happy to announce that
the Jenkins community has moved all its link:/chat/#internet-relay-chat-irc[official IRC channels] to link:https://libera.chat/[Libera chat].
We have started our migration on May 26 as a response to the 
link:https://www.theregister.com/2021/05/26/freenode_irc_takeover/[hostile takeover]
of hundreds of open source community channel by the new Freenode management.
As decided  by the Jenkins governance meeting on June 16th, 
Libera Chat IRC channels are the only official channels going forward.

A more detailed history of the transition is available on the link:https://groups.google.com/g/jenkinsci-dev/c/pEcun5ZSfgo/m/ztRg03VNAgAJ[Jenkins developers mailing list].

=== What did we move?

We have created the following IRC chats:

that currently live on freenode to libera.chat:

* `#jenkins` - general discussion channel for Jenkins users and developers.

>   We no longer consider it a central chat for all things Jenkins, but we intend to keep it available to users

Reviewer 3: This message is confusing as we still mention that channel as the default communication channel
-> https://www.jenkins.io/chat/#jenkins

I would just remove that mention for now until we decide which channel should be the default one

Reviewer: Will submit a follow up PR

  who want to keep using IRC.
* `#jenkins-hosting` - Chat used by the link:/project/teams/hosting/[Hosting Team] to manage hosting automation
* `#jenkins-infra` - Chat used by the link:/projects/infrastructure/#team[Infrastructure Team] to coordinate efforts related to Jenkins project infrastructure and the incident response
* `#jenkins-release`- Chat used for Jenkins core release coordination by the link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jenkins/blob/master/docs/MAINTAINERS.adoc#team[Release Team]

All other channels have NOT been moved to Libera Chat IRC and were replaced by other channels.
Most notable channels:

* `#jenkins-meeting` - the link:/project/governance-meeting/[Jenkins Governance Meeting] uses combination of Zoom and Google Docs at the moment. We do not longer use the IRC chat for that purpose.

> * `#jenkins-cert` - no private chat going forward. The link:/security[Security Team] will use mailing lists only going forward

Reviewer 2: As this was never a publicly documented or accessible channel, there is no reason to bring it up here.

Reviewer: I would keep it if you do not mind. I would rather be transparent that we had this channel and that it might have been compromised

Reviewer 2: That's not what this says

Also, nobody without access has a chance to understand what it means; not to mention we checked already for private content.

So, hard 👎 from me for this.

Reviewer 4: @daniel-beck just FYI this has already been merged, so a followup PR needs to be done.

I agree though, there's no point in listing a channel that wasn't documented before. I believe it was also a private channel wasn't it? There's no logs so there's no security concerns. I think it just makes things confusing to list a channel nobody knows about.

On the other hand, I'm not sure we need a list for one channel. Jenkins meeting has been dead for more than a year, I think its safe to drop this section, but I'm also not motivated enough to bother with a new PR.

Reviewer 2: > FYI this has already been merged, so a followup PR needs to be done.

Thanks, I noticed, doesn't mean whoever messed this up shouldn't clean it up though.

Very disappointing to see we're now spreading Jenkins FUD ourselves for no reason at all.

=== Freenode concerns and disclaimers

Going forward, the Jenkins community does not have **ANY** official channels on Freenode.
All channels are either removed or left abandoned.
We no longer manage or control our channels.
Most of the Jenkins IRC channel operators use IRCCloud,
and hence they link:https://twitter.com/oleg_nenashev/status/1403265278566412288[were banned] by the Freenode team on June 11th.
Only a few operators have reconnected since this event.

Taking the takeover of Freenode and hostile actions taken by the new management,
we can no longer guarantee any of the following:

* Authenticity of registered users on Freenode.
  All IRC accounts, cloaked or not, might have been taken over by the new Freenode management.
   Do not trust messages from the Jenkins contributor account IDs there.
* Confidentiality of private channels like `#jenkins-cert`.
  We performed audit of the conversations there, and we believe there are no undisclosed security vulnerabilities referenced in the channel.
   After all, this IRC has been rather dormant for the last 18 months.
 * IRC User Passwords.
   All passwords on Freenode IRC may be compromised in the future.

>    We strongly advice all users to rotate their passwords if they were used on Freenode IRC.

Reviewer 5: Advise

>  In the coming weeks we will publish backups of IRC channel conversations somewhere in our GitHub repositories.

Reviewer 5: Will we? That’s against the free node policies of the time? Not providing a public log unless explicitly stated in the topic

>  In the coming weeks we will publish backups of IRC channel conversations somewhere in our GitHub repositories.
>  If you need any conversations right now, please reach out to the Jenkins Infrastructure team.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have made backups of IRC channel conversations in the abandoned channels.
If you need to access the conversation history, please reach out to the Jenkins Infrastructure team.
```

a Freenode replacement for hundreds of open source communities using IRC.
Within just a month, a new platform has been created and adopted by almost all active projects.
We remember the Hudson to Jenkins renaming days when a similar mobilization happened in the Jenkins community,
and we appreciate all the effort put by contributors.

Special thanks to Tim Jacomb, Gavin Mogan, Alex Earl, and Olivier Vernin for their work on the migration of IRC channels
and our automation like the link:projects/infrastructure/ircbot/[IRC Bot] used by the Jenkins hosting team.

=== What's next?

In the Jenkins community we will keep using Libera Chat IRC and maintaining user and contributor channels there.
Other Jenkins chat channels like link:/chat/#gitter[Gitter] and link:/chat/#slack[Slack] are unchanged.
We intend to gradually replace many of those channels with link:https://community.jenkins.io/[community.jenkins.io].
This is a new portal powered by link:https://www.discourse.org/[Discourse].
The service is sponsored by link:https://www.discourse.org/[Civilized Discourse Construction Kit, Inc.].
It is currently in preview, stay tuned for announcements.

> As always, we will appreciate any suggestions and feedback!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As always, we will appreciate any suggestions and [feedback](https://community.jenkins.io/c/site-feedback/2)!
```
